---
title: "Embedded Systems Roadmap: Bridging the Gap"
description:
  Discover the story behind this embedded systems roadmap—a structured learning
  path for hardware and software engineers. It guides you in selecting
  resources, boosting career growth, and staying current with industry trends.
author: meysam
tags: [embedded, mcu, career]
---

It was around mid-2023 that I realized, despite working as a developer in the
field, my knowledge of embedded systems needed a significant refresh. It was
time to revisit some of the fundamentals and catch up on the latest technologies
and best practices. As I began listing topics to review, I searched for existing
embedded systems roadmaps online. However, none perfectly matched my specific
learning goals. This prompted me to create my own comprehensive roadmap—not just
for personal use, but also as a valuable resource for others on a similar
journey.

<!-- excerpt start -->

In this article, I’ll share the story behind creating my embedded systems
engineering roadmap, why it became necessary, the logic behind its structure,
and how to use it effectively in your learning journey.

<!-- excerpt end -->

## Is a Roadmap Really Necessary?

Embedded systems sit at the crossroads of hardware and software, combining
electronic components with software development principles. Consequently,
becoming an embedded engineer demands knowledge from both disciplines. However,
most people entering this field possess a stronger background in either hardware
or software—rarely both.

For instance, I entered the field with a degree in Electrical and Electronics
Engineering. I had a solid understanding of hardware circuits, sensors, and
microcontrollers. But when I started working on embedded systems, I quickly
realized that I lacked key software development concepts, such as efficient
coding, data structures, and design patterns. This made me feel like an
important piece of the puzzle was missing.

Conversely, I’ve spoken with individuals who transitioned from software
engineering or computer science backgrounds into embedded systems. They had a
strong grasp of software development but often struggled with hardware aspects,
such as interfacing with electronic components, understanding electrical
signals, or designing circuits.

This common experience highlights a clear truth: **embedded systems is an
interdisciplinary field, and regardless of your starting point, there will
likely be gaps in your knowledge.**

Furthermore, what students learn in universities—whether in electrical
engineering, computer science, or related fields—often doesn’t fully prepare
them for real-world embedded systems work. While universities provide crucial
theoretical knowledge, they sometimes lack the hands-on skills needed for
practical projects. As a result, many graduates find themselves needing
additional internships, self-study, or personal projects to meet industry
demands.

This brings us to another challenge: the overwhelming number of available
resources for **self-study**. Countless books, courses, and tutorials exist on
programming and electronics, but for someone new to embedded systems, it’s hard
to know which ones are most helpful.

Should you focus on advanced programming or spend more time on hardware
concepts, such as circuit design and microcontrollers? Without clear guidance,
it’s easy to feel lost or invest time in resources that aren’t the best fit.
While a **mentor** can be invaluable, they aren’t always available. This is
precisely where a roadmap becomes valuable. It offers a structured learning
path, providing clear direction on what to focus on and helping you choose the
most useful resources for both software and hardware, making the learning
process more manageable.

## Building the Roadmap: Challenges and Design Choices

As I mentioned earlier, the idea for creating my embedded engineering roadmap
stemmed from my personal experience of needing to refresh my skills and stay
current with new technologies. While reviewing existing roadmaps, I came across
one by
[Erick Vázquez on GitHub](https://github.com/vazeri/Embedded-Engineering-RoadMap-2018),
which was inspired by the graphical design from [roadmap.sh](http://roadmap.sh).
I appreciated its visual approach, but it was missing several important topics
and wasn’t structured in a way that would be most helpful for everyone. I
decided to use that roadmap as a foundation and began adding key topics I felt
were missing.

Developing this roadmap presented its own challenges, particularly in organizing
the vast field of embedded systems. One of the main problems was **dividing the
roadmap between embedded hardware and embedded software**, as many skills in
these areas are closely related. A skill that seems primarily software-focused
might require a good understanding of the underlying hardware, and vice versa.
Finding a good balance to clearly show these connections, while still offering
separate learning paths, was a significant consideration. To address this, I
decided to separate hardware-focused and software-focused topics structurally.
For areas that overlapped, I created an intersection section to highlight those
connections.

Once I had a more complete version, I shared it with the
[Reddit embedded community](https://www.reddit.com/r/embedded/) to get feedback
from other engineers and enthusiasts. The response was very encouraging and
inspired me to include more application-specific topics in the roadmap. You can
find one of the earliest versions of the roadmap in
[this commit](https://github.com/m3y54m/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap/tree/c2cc64e069e13aadb730d9b6c497d4181cc26fea).

Although my original goal for the roadmap was to deepen my own knowledge as a
practicing embedded systems engineer, I decided to structure it as a helpful
guide for beginners as well. To achieve this, I added instructions and
explanations in the
[README of the roadmap's GitHub repo](https://github.com/m3y54m/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap/blob/master/README.md),
along with invaluable beginner-friendly resources to guide those just starting
out in the embedded world.

Another significant challenge was trying to include as many topics as possible
to make the roadmap comprehensive, without making it too daunting for beginners.
The aim was to provide a broad overview of the embedded field, making it a
detailed resource for different learning stages. However, I also needed to
**ensure that newcomers wouldn’t feel overwhelmed**. The goal was to provide
enough detail to be helpful, but organize it in a way that guides rather than
intimidates, so that beginners can take their first steps with confidence.

Fortunately, the roadmap has gained considerable attention online, with new
contributors helping to expand
[the collection of learning resources on the GitHub page](https://github.com/m3y54m/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap).
Below, you can see the latest version of the roadmap's graphical representation.
It’s important to note that the roadmap is not complete without the curated
learning resources on the GitHub page.

![Embedded Systems Engineering Roadmap](https://github.com/m3y54m/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap/releases/latest/download/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap.png)

## How to Use This Roadmap Effectively

This roadmap is designed to guide you through complex embedded systems topics,
but with so many resources available, how do you choose where to start or which
resource best fits your needs? Let's walk through an example using the crucial
topic of embedded systems:
[**Testing**](https://github.com/m3y54m/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap/tree/master?tab=readme-ov-file#%EF%B8%8F-testing).

When you approach a new area like testing, you'll encounter various topics such
as Test-Driven Development (TDD), along with concepts like unit testing,
regression testing, integration testing, and Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) testing.
Each of these topics often has numerous books, articles, and tutorials. The
questions then arise: what do these terms mean, how are they used in practice,
how should you learn them, and which resources should you choose? Here’s a
systematic way to navigate them:

### Start with the 'Why' and Core Concepts

Before diving into specific tools or frameworks, prioritize resources that
explain the fundamental principles and the rationale behind a technique. For
TDD, this means looking for materials that clarify "why write tests before
code?" or "what problems does TDD solve?" Short articles and videos can be
particularly beneficial at this stage. However, well-written books like
[Test Driven Development for Embedded C by James W. Grenning](https://www.amazon.com/Driven-Development-Embedded-Pragmatic-Programmers/dp/193435662X)
can also provide a solid conceptual foundation.

### Identify Key Methods and Practical Approaches

Once you grasp the basic concepts, focus on resources that emphasize practical
application. For unit testing in embedded systems, you'll quickly encounter
challenges like hardware dependencies. Look for tutorials that demonstrate
techniques such as mocking and stubbing hardware interactions, which enable you
to test software components in isolation. At this stage, reading these two
articles—[Embedded C/C++ Unit Testing Basics](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/unit-testing-basics)
and
[Embedded C/C++ Unit Testing with Mocks](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/unit-test-mocking)—was
instrumental in guiding me in the right direction. These resources provide
concrete patterns and frameworks that make applying the theory much more
approachable.

### Understand Limitations and Explore Advanced Solutions

As you gain experience, you'll start to recognize the limitations of certain
techniques. For instance, unit testing, while excellent for verifying software
logic, cannot fully simulate real hardware interactions, complex timing, or
environmental factors. This realization is crucial and should naturally
encourage you to explore more advanced techniques. For example, understanding
the limits of unit testing can lead you to investigate Hardware-in-the-Loop
(HIL) testing. A helpful introduction to this topic can be found in the video
[What is Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) Testing? A Beginner's Guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=znhmahegnlc).

### Seek Specialized and Deep-Dive Resources

For advanced topics, such as HIL, you'll need more specialized resources. Look
for whitepapers, conference presentations, or dedicated courses from industry
leaders. These resources provide the depth needed to understand complex setups
and comprehensive system validation.

### Key Questions to Stay on Track

Throughout this process, continuously filter resources by asking:

- **"What specific problem am I trying to solve right now?"** Are you aiming for
  conceptual understanding, practical application, or advanced solutions?

- **"Does this resource explain concepts clearly and simply?"** Look for
  materials that break down complex ideas intuitively.

- **"Is it practical and hands-on?"** For technical topics, direct application
  and examples are often key to solidifying understanding.

- **"Is it reputable and well-regarded?"** Consider the author's expertise and
  the consensus of the community.

- **"Does it address specific challenges relevant to embedded systems?"** For
  our field, this means prioritizing resources that acknowledge and provide
  solutions for hardware interaction difficulties.

By applying this selective approach, you can navigate the vast amount of
information presented in this roadmap or elsewhere. It helps you dive into a
topic, even if you're unsure where or how to start, and find the most relevant
and useful materials at each stage of your learning journey.

## Feedback and Future Directions

I’ve received some helpful feedback on the roadmap, along with a few criticisms.
I want to address some of the most common concerns and share my thoughts on
them:

**_"The roadmap has too much information and can be overwhelming for
beginners."_**

I understand the roadmap might feel overwhelming, especially for beginners. I
included a wide range of topics to cover the full spectrum of embedded systems,
but it can seem like a lot. To help with this, I added a section in the README
encouraging beginners to start with simple, manageable hands-on projects and use
the roadmap as a reference when needed.

**_"It doesn’t go deep enough into certain areas, like application-specific
fields (automotive, aerospace, agriculture, etc.)."_**

The graphical roadmap provides an overview of key topics but doesn’t go into
extreme depth in specific fields, as that would make it too complicated.
Instead, I’ve made the README an open space where contributors can add resources
for specific application areas, such as automotive, aerospace, and more. I am
confident that with more contributions in the future, the roadmap will become
even more inclusive.

**_"The roadmap doesn't cover hardware design skills enough."_**

That was somewhat intentional. Many embedded system engineers already come from
electrical or hardware backgrounds, so I wanted to focus more on the software
side, which is often overlooked. While the graphical roadmap may seem light on
hardware skills, the curated list of resources in the README offers plenty of
valuable materials for hardware development. That said, I'm open to expanding
the hardware section, as long as it maintains the roadmap's simplicity and
clarity.

I encourage everyone, whether you're a beginner or an experienced engineer, to
share your feedback and contribute, as long as the roadmap stays useful for both
beginners and experienced professionals. I admit that it can be difficult, and
sometimes impossible, to apply all feedback to the roadmap. For example, someone
working in automotive may feel a topic should be added, while someone in IoT may
think it’s unnecessary. Besides, it's impossible to please everyone. The only
option is to **find a middle ground that balances everyone's opinions**.

Although this roadmap is designed to be helpful for experienced engineers, **its
primary audience is beginners**, as experienced engineers can typically navigate
on their own. It's the beginners who truly benefit from a clear,
easy-to-understand guide. So, let's keep it simple for them.

Regarding the roadmap's future, I've considered adding it to
[roadmap.sh](http://roadmap.sh), but I have some reservations. A GitHub repo
offers more freedom, flexibility, and engagement, allowing contributors' work to
be better recognized by others, compared to how contributions are managed on
roadmap.sh. However, I'm still considering it and would love to hear thoughts on
this.

I encourage everyone to share their thoughts and help improve it by suggesting
design enhancements or adding resources to the
[embedded roadmap's GitHub repo](https://github.com/m3y54m/Embedded-Engineering-Roadmap/).
Your input will make this project even more useful, especially for newcomers to
the embedded world.

## Final Words

My own experience with this roadmap shows a key truth about career growth: it’s
a mix of **independent learning** and **collaboration**. While self-directed
study builds the discipline for lifelong learning, collaboration brings fresh
perspectives and accelerates progress in ways you cannot achieve alone.

### Knowledge Sharing

- **Engage with the Community:** Participate in specialized forums like the
  [Interrupt Slack community](https://interrupt-slack.herokuapp.com/) or other
  active online groups. These platforms offer real-time problem-solving and
  expose you to diverse approaches from practitioners worldwide.

- **Learn from Colleagues:** If you work in a team, crowdsource knowledge from
  experienced colleagues. A brief conversation with a senior engineer can often
  provide insights that would take hours to find in documentation.

- **Teach to Learn:** Consider presenting what you've learned at company
  lunch-and-learns or technical talks. Teaching reinforces your understanding
  and sparks valuable discussions that deepen everyone's knowledge.

The key is to balance consuming information with contributing back, whether by
asking thoughtful questions or sharing solutions. While self-study is important,
the insights gained from experienced engineers and their real-world
problem-solving skills are transformative.

### Embrace Continuous Learning and Stay Market-Aware

**Continuous improvement** is not optional; it is essential. Focus on mastering
the fundamentals of your chosen area to build a strong foundation. Learning does
not stop when you land a job—a new role is often the beginning of a new learning
phase. The embedded field evolves constantly, so you must proactively stay
current to remain valuable.

**Track job market requirements** by analyzing postings on platforms like
LinkedIn, Indeed, and Glassdoor. Filter these listings by location, experience
level, and company size to gain targeted insights into in-demand technical
skills and salary ranges. Use multiple sources to get a comprehensive view of
current demands and emerging trends. Focus on skills that appear consistently,
as these represent genuine market needs.

This systematic approach helps you make informed decisions about where to invest
your learning efforts, ensuring you develop skills with real market value.
